book/src/filters.md, before:

# Filters

Values such as those obtained from variables can be post-processed
using **filters**.
Filters are applied to values using the pipe symbol (`|`) and may
have optional extra arguments in parentheses.
Filters can be chained, in which case the output from one filter
is passed to the next.

```
{{ "HELLO" | lower }}
```

Askama has a collection of built-in filters, documented below, but can also include custom filters. 
Additionally, the `json` filter is included in the built-in filters, but is disabled by default.
Enable it with Cargo features (see below for more information).

## Built-In Filters
[#built-in-filters]: #built-in-filters

### capitalize
[#capitalize]: #capitalize

Capitalize a value. The first character will be uppercase, all others lowercase:

```jinja
{{ "hello" | capitalize }}
```

Output:

```text
Hello
```

### center
[#center]: #center

Centers the value in a field of a given width:

```jinja
-{{ "a" | center(5) }}-
```

Output:
```text
-  a  -
```

### deref
[#deref]: #deref

Dereferences the given argument.

```jinja
{% let s = String::from("a") | as_ref %}
{% if s | deref == String::from("b") %}
{% endif %}
```

will become:

```rust
let s = &String::from("a");
if *s == String::from("b") {}
```

### escape | e
[#escape]: #escape--e

Escapes HTML characters in strings:

```jinja
{{ "Escape <>&" | e }}
```

Output:

```html
Escape &lt;&gt;&amp;
```

Optionally, it is possible to specify and override which escaper is used. 
Consider a template where the escaper is configured as [`escape = "none"`]. 
However, somewhere escaping using the HTML escaper is desired. 
Then it is possible to override and use the HTML escaper like this:

```jinja
{{ "Don't Escape <>&" | escape }}
{{ "Don't Escape <>&" | e }}

{{ "Escape <>&" | escape("html") }}
{{ "Escape <>&" | e("html") }}
```

Output:

```text
Don't Escape <>&
Don't Escape <>&

Escape &lt;&gt;&amp;
Escape &lt;&gt;&amp;
```

[`escape = "none"`]: creating_templates.html#the-template-attribute

### filesizeformat
[#filesizeformat]: #filesizeformat

Returns adequate string representation (in KB, ..) of number of bytes:

```jinja
{{ 1000 | filesizeformat }}
```

Output:
```text
1 KB
```

### fmt

[#fmt]: #fmt

Formats arguments according to the specified format

The *second* argument to this filter must be a string literal (as in normal
Rust). The two arguments are passed through to [`format!()`] by
the Askama code generator, but the order is swapped to support filter
composition.

```jinja
{{ value | fmt("{:?}") }}
```

As an example, this allows filters to be composed like the following.
Which is not possible using the `format` filter.

```jinja
{{ value | capitalize | fmt("{:?}") }}
```

### format
[#format]: #format

Formats arguments according to the specified format.

The first argument to this filter must be a string literal (as in normal Rust).

All arguments are passed through to [`format!()`] by the Askama code generator.

```jinja
{{ "{:?}" | format(var) }}
```

[`format!()`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/std/macro.format.html

### indent
[#indent]: #indent

Indent newlines with width spaces.

```jinja
{{ "hello\nfoo\nbar" | indent(4) }}
```

Output:

```text
hello
    foo
    bar
```

### join
[#join]: #join

Joins iterable into a string separated by provided argument.

```rust
array = &["foo", "bar", "bazz"]
```

```jinja
{{ array | join(", ") }}
```

Output:

```text
foo, bar, bazz
```

### linebreaks
[#linebreaks]: #linebreaks

Replaces line breaks in plain text with appropriate HTML.

A single newline becomes an HTML line break `<br>` and a new line followed by a blank line becomes a paragraph break `<p>`.

```jinja
{{ "hello\nworld\n\nfrom\naskama" | linebreaks }}
```

Output:

```html
<p>hello<br />world</p><p>from<br />askama</p>
```

### linebreaksbr
[#linebreaksbr]: #linebreaksbr

Converts all newlines in a piece of plain text to HTML line breaks.

```jinja
{{ "hello\nworld\n\nfrom\naskama" | linebreaks }}
```

Output:

```html
hello<br />world<br /><br />from<br />askama
```

### paragraphbreaks
[#paragraphbreaks]: #paragraphbreaks

A new line followed by a blank line becomes `<p>`, but, unlike `linebreaks`, single new lines are ignored and no `<br/>` tags are generated.

Consecutive double line breaks will be reduced down to a single paragraph break.

This is useful in contexts where changing single line breaks to line break tags would interfere with other HTML elements, such as lists and nested `<div>` tags.

```jinja
{{ "hello\nworld\n\nfrom\n\n\n\naskama" | paragraphbreaks }}
```

Output:

```html
<p>hello\nworld</p><p>from</p><p>askama</p>
```

### lower | lowercase
[#lower]: #lower--lowercase

Converts to lowercase.

```jinja
{{ "HELLO" | lower }}
```

Output:

```text
hello
```

### `pluralize`
[#pluralize]: #pluralize

Select a singular or plural version of a word, depending on the input value.

If the value of `self.count` is +1 or -1, then "cat" is returned, otherwise "cats":

```jinja
cat{{ count | pluralize }}
```

You can override the default empty singular suffix, e.g. to spell "doggo" for a single dog:

```jinja
dog{{ count | pluralize("go") }}
```

If the word cannot be declined by simply adding a suffix,
then you can also override singular and the plural, too:

```jinja
{{ count | pluralize("mouse", "mice") }}
```

More complex languages that know multiple plurals might be impossible to implement with this filter,
though.

### ref
[#ref]: #ref

Creates a reference to the given argument.

```jinja
{{ "a" | ref }}
{{ self.x | ref }}
```

will become:

```rust
&"a"
&self.x
```

### safe
[#safe]: #safe

Marks a string (or other Display type) as safe. By default all strings are escaped according to the format.

```
{{ "<p>I'm Safe</p>" | safe }}
```

Output:

```
<p>I'm Safe</p>
```

### title
[#title]: #title

Return a title cased version of the value. Words will start with uppercase letters, all
remaining characters are lowercase.

```jinja
{{ "hello WORLD" | title }}
```

Output:

```text
Hello World
```

### trim
[#trim]: #trim

Strip leading and trailing whitespace.

```jinja
{{ " hello " | trim }}
```

Output:

```text
hello
```

### truncate
[#truncate]: #truncate

Limit string length, appends '...' if truncated.


```jinja
{{ "hello" | truncate(2) }}
```

Output:

```text
he...
```

### upper | uppercase
[#upper]: #upper--uppercase

Converts to uppercase.

```jinja
{{ "hello" | upper }}
```

Output:

```text
HELLO
```

### urlencode | urlencode_strict
[#urlencode]: #urlencode--urlencode_strict

Percent encodes the string. Replaces reserved characters with the % escape character followed by a byte value as two hexadecimal digits.

```jinja
{{ "hello?world" | urlencode }}
```

Output:

```text
hello%3Fworld
```

With `|urlencode` all characters except ASCII letters, digits, and `_.-~/` are escaped.
With `|urlencode_strict` a forward slash `/` is escaped, too.

### wordcount
[#wordcount]: #wordcount

Count the words in that string.

```jinja
{{ "askama is sort of cool" | wordcount }}
```

Output:

```text
5
```

## Optional / feature gated filters
[#optional-filters]: #optional--feature-gated-filters

The following filters can be enabled by requesting the respective feature in the Cargo.toml
[dependencies section](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/specifying-dependencies.html), e.g.

```toml
[dependencies]
askama = { version = "0.12", features = ["serde_json"] }
```

### `json` | `tojson`
[#json]: #json--tojson

Enabling the `serde_json` feature will enable the use of the `json` filter.
This will output formatted JSON for any value that implements the required
[`Serialize`](https://docs.rs/serde/1.*/serde/trait.Serialize.html) trait.
The generated string does not contain ampersands `&`, chevrons `< >`, or apostrophes `'`.

To use it in a `<script>` you can combine it with the safe filter.
In HTML attributes, you can either use it in quotation marks `"{{data | json}}"` as is,
or in apostrophes with the (optional) safe filter `'{{data | json | safe}}'`.
In HTML texts the output of e.g. `<pre>{{data | json | safe}}</pre>` is safe, too.

```jinja
Good: <li data-extra="{{data | json}}">…</li>
Good: <li data-extra='{{data | json | safe}}'>…</li>
Good: <pre>{{data | json | safe}}</pre>
Good: <script>var data = {{data | json | safe}};</script>

Bad:  <li data-extra="{{data | json | safe}}">…</li>
Bad:  <script>var data = {{data | json}};</script>
Bad:  <script>var data = "{{data | json | safe}}";</script>

Ugly: <script>var data = "{{data | json}}";</script>
Ugly: <script>var data = '{{data | json | safe}}';</script>
```

By default, a compact representation of the data is generated, i.e. no whitespaces are generated
between individual values. To generate a readable representation, you can either pass an integer
how many spaces to use as indentation, or you can pass a string that gets used as prefix:

```jinja2
Prefix with four spaces:
<textarea>{{data | tojson(4)}}</textarea>

Prefix with two &nbsp; characters:
<p>{{data | tojson("\u{a0}\u{a0}")}}</p>
```

## Custom Filters
[#custom-filters]: #custom-filters

To define your own filters, simply have a module named `filters` in scope of the context deriving a `Template` impl 
and define the filters as functions within this module. 
The functions must have at least two arguments and the return type must be `askama::Result<T>`.
Although there are no restrictions on `T` for a single filter, 
the final result of a chain of filters must implement `Display`. 

The arguments to the filters are passed as follows:
* The first argument corresponds to the expression they are applied to.
* The second argument are the [runtime values](./runtime.html):
  [`values: &dyn askama::Values`](./doc/askama/trait.Values.html).
* Subsequent arguments, if any, must be given directly when calling the filter.
  The first argument may or may not be a reference, depending on the context in which the filter is called.

To abstract over ownership, consider defining your argument as a trait bound.
For example, the `trim` built-in filter accepts any value implementing `Display`. 
Its signature is similar to `fn trim(s: impl std::fmt::Display, values: &dyn askama::Values) -> askama::Result<String>`.

Note that built-in filters have preference over custom filters, so, in case of name collision, the built-in filter is applied.

### Examples

Implementing a filter that replaces all instances of `"oo"` for `"aa"`.
```rust
use askama::Template;

#[derive(Template)]
#[template(source = "{{ s | myfilter }}", ext = "txt")]
struct MyFilterTemplate<'a> {
    s: &'a str,
}

// Any filter defined in the module `filters` is accessible in your template.
mod filters {
    // This filter does not have extra arguments
    pub fn myfilter<T: std::fmt::Display>(
        s: T,
        _: &dyn askama::Values,
    ) -> askama::Result<String> {
        let s = s.to_string();
        Ok(s.replace("oo", "aa"))
    }
}

fn main() {
    let t = MyFilterTemplate { s: "foo" };
    assert_eq!(t.render().unwrap(), "faa");
}
```

Implementing a filter that replaces all instances of `"oo"` for `n` times `"a"`.
```rust
use askama::Template;

#[derive(Template)]
#[template(source = "{{ s | myfilter(4) }}", ext = "txt")]
struct MyFilterTemplate<'a> {
    s: &'a str,
}

// Any filter defined in the module `filters` is accessible in your template.
mod filters {
    // This filter requires a `usize` input when called in templates
    pub fn myfilter<T: std::fmt::Display>(
        s: T,
        _: &dyn askama::Values,
        n: usize,
    ) -> askama::Result<String> {
        let s = s.to_string();
        let mut replace = String::with_capacity(n);
        replace.extend((0..n).map(|_| "a"));
        Ok(s.replace("oo", &replace))
    }
}

fn main() {
    let t = MyFilterTemplate { s: "foo" };
    assert_eq!(t.render().unwrap(), "faaaa");
}
```

### Runtime values
[#runtime-values]: #runtime-values

It is possible to access [runtime values](./runtime.html) in custom filters:

```rust
{{#include ../../testing/tests/book_example_runtime_values_in_custom_filters.rs}}
```

## HTML-safe types
[#html-safe-types]: #html-safe-types

Askama will try to avoid escaping types that generate string representations that do not contain
"HTML-unsafe characters".
HTML-safe characters are characters that can be used in any context in HTML texts and attributes.
The "unsafe" characters are: `<`, `>`, `&`, `"` and `'`.

In order to know which types do not need to be escaped, askama has the marker trait
`askama::filters::HtmlSafe`, and any type that implements that trait won't get automatically
escaped in a `{{expr}}` expression.
By default e.g. all primitive integer types are marked as HTML-safe.

You can also mark your custom type `MyStruct` as HTML-safe using:

```rust
impl askama::filters::HtmlSafe for MyStruct {}
```

This automatically marks references `&MyStruct` as HTML-safe, too.

### Safe output of custom filters
[#safe-output-of-custom-filters]: #safe-output-of-custom-filters

Say, you have a custom filter `| strip` that removes all HTML-unsafe characters:

```rust
fn strip(s: impl ToString) -> Result<String, askama::Error> {
    Ok(s.to_string()
        .chars()
        .filter(|c| !matches!(c, '<' | '>' | '&' | '"' | '\''))
        .collect()
    )
}
```

Then you can also mark the output as safe using `askama::filters::Safe`:

```rust
fn strip(s: impl ToString) -> Result<Safe<String>, askama::Error> {
    Ok(Safe(...))
}
```

There also is `askama::filters::MaybeSafe` that can be used to mark *some* output as safe,
if you know that *some* inputs for our filter will always result in a safe output:

```rust
fn as_sign(i: i32) -> Result<MaybeSafe<&'static str>, askama::Error> {
    match i.into() {
        i if i < 0 => Ok(MaybeSafe::NeedsEscaping("<0")),
        i if i > 0 => Ok(MaybeSafe::NeedsEscaping(">0")),
        _          => Ok(MaybeSafe::Safe("=0")),
    }
}
```

Commit message:

Implement `first` and `blank` arguments for `|indent`

book/src/filters.md, after:

# Filters

Values such as those obtained from variables can be post-processed
using **filters**.
Filters are applied to values using the pipe symbol (`|`) and may
have optional extra arguments in parentheses.
Filters can be chained, in which case the output from one filter
is passed to the next.

```
{{ "HELLO" | lower }}
```

Askama has a collection of built-in filters, documented below, but can also include custom filters. 
Additionally, the `json` filter is included in the built-in filters, but is disabled by default.
Enable it with Cargo features (see below for more information).

## Built-In Filters
[#built-in-filters]: #built-in-filters

### capitalize
[#capitalize]: #capitalize

Capitalize a value. The first character will be uppercase, all others lowercase:

```jinja
{{ "hello" | capitalize }}
```

Output:

```text
Hello
```

### center
[#center]: #center

Centers the value in a field of a given width:

```jinja
-{{ "a" | center(5) }}-
```

Output:
```text
-  a  -
```

### deref
[#deref]: #deref

Dereferences the given argument.

```jinja
{% let s = String::from("a") | as_ref %}
{% if s | deref == String::from("b") %}
{% endif %}
```

will become:

```rust
let s = &String::from("a");
if *s == String::from("b") {}
```

### escape | e
[#escape]: #escape--e

Escapes HTML characters in strings:

```jinja
{{ "Escape <>&" | e }}
```

Output:

```html
Escape &lt;&gt;&amp;
```

Optionally, it is possible to specify and override which escaper is used. 
Consider a template where the escaper is configured as [`escape = "none"`]. 
However, somewhere escaping using the HTML escaper is desired. 
Then it is possible to override and use the HTML escaper like this:

```jinja
{{ "Don't Escape <>&" | escape }}
{{ "Don't Escape <>&" | e }}

{{ "Escape <>&" | escape("html") }}
{{ "Escape <>&" | e("html") }}
```

Output:

```text
Don't Escape <>&
Don't Escape <>&

Escape &lt;&gt;&amp;
Escape &lt;&gt;&amp;
```

[`escape = "none"`]: creating_templates.html#the-template-attribute

### filesizeformat
[#filesizeformat]: #filesizeformat

Returns adequate string representation (in KB, ..) of number of bytes:

```jinja
{{ 1000 | filesizeformat }}
```

Output:
```text
1 KB
```

### fmt

[#fmt]: #fmt

Formats arguments according to the specified format

The *second* argument to this filter must be a string literal (as in normal
Rust). The two arguments are passed through to [`format!()`] by
the Askama code generator, but the order is swapped to support filter
composition.

```jinja
{{ value | fmt("{:?}") }}
```

As an example, this allows filters to be composed like the following.
Which is not possible using the `format` filter.

```jinja
{{ value | capitalize | fmt("{:?}") }}
```

### format
[#format]: #format

Formats arguments according to the specified format.

The first argument to this filter must be a string literal (as in normal Rust).

All arguments are passed through to [`format!()`] by the Askama code generator.

```jinja
{{ "{:?}" | format(var) }}
```

[`format!()`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/std/macro.format.html

### indent
[#indent]: #indent

Indent newlines with width spaces.

```jinja
{{ "hello\nfoo\nbar" | indent(4) }}
```

Output:

```text
hello
    foo
    bar
```

The first argument can also be a string that will be used to indent lines.

The first line and blank lines are not indented by default.
The filter has two optional [`bool`] arguments `first` and `blank`, that can be set to `true`
to indent the first and blank lines, resp.:

```jinja
{{ "hello\n\nbar" | indent("$ ", true, true) }}
```

Output:

```text
$ hello
$ 
$ bar
```

### join
[#join]: #join

Joins iterable into a string separated by provided argument.

```rust
array = &["foo", "bar", "bazz"]
```

```jinja
{{ array | join(", ") }}
```

Output:

```text
foo, bar, bazz
```

### linebreaks
[#linebreaks]: #linebreaks

Replaces line breaks in plain text with appropriate HTML.

A single newline becomes an HTML line break `<br>` and a new line followed by a blank line becomes a paragraph break `<p>`.

```jinja
{{ "hello\nworld\n\nfrom\naskama" | linebreaks }}
```

Output:

```html
<p>hello<br />world</p><p>from<br />askama</p>
```

### linebreaksbr
[#linebreaksbr]: #linebreaksbr

Converts all newlines in a piece of plain text to HTML line breaks.

```jinja
{{ "hello\nworld\n\nfrom\naskama" | linebreaks }}
```

Output:

```html
hello<br />world<br /><br />from<br />askama
```

### paragraphbreaks
[#paragraphbreaks]: #paragraphbreaks

A new line followed by a blank line becomes `<p>`, but, unlike `linebreaks`, single new lines are ignored and no `<br/>` tags are generated.

Consecutive double line breaks will be reduced down to a single paragraph break.

This is useful in contexts where changing single line breaks to line break tags would interfere with other HTML elements, such as lists and nested `<div>` tags.

```jinja
{{ "hello\nworld\n\nfrom\n\n\n\naskama" | paragraphbreaks }}
```

Output:

```html
<p>hello\nworld</p><p>from</p><p>askama</p>
```

### lower | lowercase
[#lower]: #lower--lowercase

Converts to lowercase.

```jinja
{{ "HELLO" | lower }}
```

Output:

```text
hello
```

### `pluralize`
[#pluralize]: #pluralize

Select a singular or plural version of a word, depending on the input value.

If the value of `self.count` is +1 or -1, then "cat" is returned, otherwise "cats":

```jinja
cat{{ count | pluralize }}
```

You can override the default empty singular suffix, e.g. to spell "doggo" for a single dog:

```jinja
dog{{ count | pluralize("go") }}
```

If the word cannot be declined by simply adding a suffix,
then you can also override singular and the plural, too:

```jinja
{{ count | pluralize("mouse", "mice") }}
```

More complex languages that know multiple plurals might be impossible to implement with this filter,
though.

### ref
[#ref]: #ref

Creates a reference to the given argument.

```jinja
{{ "a" | ref }}
{{ self.x | ref }}
```

will become:

```rust
&"a"
&self.x
```

### safe
[#safe]: #safe

Marks a string (or other Display type) as safe. By default all strings are escaped according to the format.

```
{{ "<p>I'm Safe</p>" | safe }}
```

Output:

```
<p>I'm Safe</p>
```

### title
[#title]: #title

Return a title cased version of the value. Words will start with uppercase letters, all
remaining characters are lowercase.

```jinja
{{ "hello WORLD" | title }}
```

Output:

```text
Hello World
```

### trim
[#trim]: #trim

Strip leading and trailing whitespace.

```jinja
{{ " hello " | trim }}
```

Output:

```text
hello
```

### truncate
[#truncate]: #truncate

Limit string length, appends '...' if truncated.


```jinja
{{ "hello" | truncate(2) }}
```

Output:

```text
he...
```

### upper | uppercase
[#upper]: #upper--uppercase

Converts to uppercase.

```jinja
{{ "hello" | upper }}
```

Output:

```text
HELLO
```

### urlencode | urlencode_strict
[#urlencode]: #urlencode--urlencode_strict

Percent encodes the string. Replaces reserved characters with the % escape character followed by a byte value as two hexadecimal digits.

```jinja
{{ "hello?world" | urlencode }}
```

Output:

```text
hello%3Fworld
```

With `|urlencode` all characters except ASCII letters, digits, and `_.-~/` are escaped.
With `|urlencode_strict` a forward slash `/` is escaped, too.

### wordcount
[#wordcount]: #wordcount

Count the words in that string.

```jinja
{{ "askama is sort of cool" | wordcount }}
```

Output:

```text
5
```

## Optional / feature gated filters
[#optional-filters]: #optional--feature-gated-filters

The following filters can be enabled by requesting the respective feature in the Cargo.toml
[dependencies section](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/specifying-dependencies.html), e.g.

```toml
[dependencies]
askama = { version = "0.12", features = ["serde_json"] }
```

### `json` | `tojson`
[#json]: #json--tojson

Enabling the `serde_json` feature will enable the use of the `json` filter.
This will output formatted JSON for any value that implements the required
[`Serialize`](https://docs.rs/serde/1.*/serde/trait.Serialize.html) trait.
The generated string does not contain ampersands `&`, chevrons `< >`, or apostrophes `'`.

To use it in a `<script>` you can combine it with the safe filter.
In HTML attributes, you can either use it in quotation marks `"{{data | json}}"` as is,
or in apostrophes with the (optional) safe filter `'{{data | json | safe}}'`.
In HTML texts the output of e.g. `<pre>{{data | json | safe}}</pre>` is safe, too.

```jinja
Good: <li data-extra="{{data | json}}">…</li>
Good: <li data-extra='{{data | json | safe}}'>…</li>
Good: <pre>{{data | json | safe}}</pre>
Good: <script>var data = {{data | json | safe}};</script>

Bad:  <li data-extra="{{data | json | safe}}">…</li>
Bad:  <script>var data = {{data | json}};</script>
Bad:  <script>var data = "{{data | json | safe}}";</script>

Ugly: <script>var data = "{{data | json}}";</script>
Ugly: <script>var data = '{{data | json | safe}}';</script>
```

By default, a compact representation of the data is generated, i.e. no whitespaces are generated
between individual values. To generate a readable representation, you can either pass an integer
how many spaces to use as indentation, or you can pass a string that gets used as prefix:

```jinja2
Prefix with four spaces:
<textarea>{{data | tojson(4)}}</textarea>

Prefix with two &nbsp; characters:
<p>{{data | tojson("\u{a0}\u{a0}")}}</p>
```

## Custom Filters
[#custom-filters]: #custom-filters

To define your own filters, simply have a module named `filters` in scope of the context deriving a `Template` impl 
and define the filters as functions within this module. 
The functions must have at least two arguments and the return type must be `askama::Result<T>`.
Although there are no restrictions on `T` for a single filter, 
the final result of a chain of filters must implement `Display`. 

The arguments to the filters are passed as follows:
* The first argument corresponds to the expression they are applied to.
* The second argument are the [runtime values](./runtime.html):
  [`values: &dyn askama::Values`](./doc/askama/trait.Values.html).
* Subsequent arguments, if any, must be given directly when calling the filter.
  The first argument may or may not be a reference, depending on the context in which the filter is called.

To abstract over ownership, consider defining your argument as a trait bound.
For example, the `trim` built-in filter accepts any value implementing `Display`. 
Its signature is similar to `fn trim(s: impl std::fmt::Display, values: &dyn askama::Values) -> askama::Result<String>`.

Note that built-in filters have preference over custom filters, so, in case of name collision, the built-in filter is applied.

### Examples

Implementing a filter that replaces all instances of `"oo"` for `"aa"`.
```rust
use askama::Template;

#[derive(Template)]
#[template(source = "{{ s | myfilter }}", ext = "txt")]
struct MyFilterTemplate<'a> {
    s: &'a str,
}

// Any filter defined in the module `filters` is accessible in your template.
mod filters {
    // This filter does not have extra arguments
    pub fn myfilter<T: std::fmt::Display>(
        s: T,
        _: &dyn askama::Values,
    ) -> askama::Result<String> {
        let s = s.to_string();
        Ok(s.replace("oo", "aa"))
    }
}

fn main() {
    let t = MyFilterTemplate { s: "foo" };
    assert_eq!(t.render().unwrap(), "faa");
}
```

Implementing a filter that replaces all instances of `"oo"` for `n` times `"a"`.
```rust
use askama::Template;

#[derive(Template)]
#[template(source = "{{ s | myfilter(4) }}", ext = "txt")]
struct MyFilterTemplate<'a> {
    s: &'a str,
}

// Any filter defined in the module `filters` is accessible in your template.
mod filters {
    // This filter requires a `usize` input when called in templates
    pub fn myfilter<T: std::fmt::Display>(
        s: T,
        _: &dyn askama::Values,
        n: usize,
    ) -> askama::Result<String> {
        let s = s.to_string();
        let mut replace = String::with_capacity(n);
        replace.extend((0..n).map(|_| "a"));
        Ok(s.replace("oo", &replace))
    }
}

fn main() {
    let t = MyFilterTemplate { s: "foo" };
    assert_eq!(t.render().unwrap(), "faaaa");
}
```

### Runtime values
[#runtime-values]: #runtime-values

It is possible to access [runtime values](./runtime.html) in custom filters:

```rust
{{#include ../../testing/tests/book_example_runtime_values_in_custom_filters.rs}}
```

## HTML-safe types
[#html-safe-types]: #html-safe-types

Askama will try to avoid escaping types that generate string representations that do not contain
"HTML-unsafe characters".
HTML-safe characters are characters that can be used in any context in HTML texts and attributes.
The "unsafe" characters are: `<`, `>`, `&`, `"` and `'`.

In order to know which types do not need to be escaped, askama has the marker trait
`askama::filters::HtmlSafe`, and any type that implements that trait won't get automatically
escaped in a `{{expr}}` expression.
By default e.g. all primitive integer types are marked as HTML-safe.

You can also mark your custom type `MyStruct` as HTML-safe using:

```rust
impl askama::filters::HtmlSafe for MyStruct {}
```

This automatically marks references `&MyStruct` as HTML-safe, too.

### Safe output of custom filters
[#safe-output-of-custom-filters]: #safe-output-of-custom-filters

Say, you have a custom filter `| strip` that removes all HTML-unsafe characters:

```rust
fn strip(s: impl ToString) -> Result<String, askama::Error> {
    Ok(s.to_string()
        .chars()
        .filter(|c| !matches!(c, '<' | '>' | '&' | '"' | '\''))
        .collect()
    )
}
```

Then you can also mark the output as safe using `askama::filters::Safe`:

```rust
fn strip(s: impl ToString) -> Result<Safe<String>, askama::Error> {
    Ok(Safe(...))
}
```

There also is `askama::filters::MaybeSafe` that can be used to mark *some* output as safe,
if you know that *some* inputs for our filter will always result in a safe output:

```rust
fn as_sign(i: i32) -> Result<MaybeSafe<&'static str>, askama::Error> {
    match i.into() {
        i if i < 0 => Ok(MaybeSafe::NeedsEscaping("<0")),
        i if i > 0 => Ok(MaybeSafe::NeedsEscaping(">0")),
        _          => Ok(MaybeSafe::Safe("=0")),
    }
}
```
